
Feverfew : Natural Ingredient Reference Feverfew Feverfew is used for
fever, headaches, prevention of migraines, and menstrual
irregularities. It is also used orally for arthritis, psoriasis,
allergies, asthma, tinnitus, vertigo, nausea and vomiting. Feverfew is
also used for infertility, anemia, cancer, common cold, earache, liver
disease, prevention of miscarriage, muscular tension, orthopedic
disorders, swollen feet, diarrhea, and dyspepsia including indigestion
and gas. The applicable part of feverfew is the leaf. At least 39 constituents
of feverfew have been identified. It used to be believed that the
sesquiterpene lactone, parthenolide, is one of the main active
constituents. Laboratory evidence
suggests that feverfew extracts might inhibit platelet aggregation and
inhibit serotonin release from platelets and leucocytes. Feverfew might
also inhibit serum proteases and leukotrienes. Feverfew also
appears to block prostaglandin synthesis by inhibiting phospholipase,
which prevents the release of arachidonic acid. Chrysanthenyl
acetate, an essential oil of feverfew, has been suggested as one active
component. Chrysanthenyl acetate inhibits prostaglandin synthetase and
might have analgesic properties. Feverfew also
contains melatonin. Migraine attacks have been associated with
decreased melatonin excretion. Other pharmacological effects include
cytostatic effect on tumor cell growth, inhibition of inflammation and
pain transmission, and anti-inflammatory effects. Published Clinical Studies P arthenolide-depleted Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) protects skin from UV irradiation and external aggression. Martin K, Sur R, Liebel F, Tierney N, Lyte P, Garay M, Oddos T, Anthonavage M, Shapiro S, Southall M. Johnson & Johnson Skin Research Center, CPPW, a unit of Johnson & Johnson Consumer Companies, Inc., Skillman, NJ, USA. The skin is under
continual assault from a variety of damaging environmental factors such
as ultraviolet irradiation and atmospheric pollutants, and as organisms
age the cumulative damage exceeds the capacity of endogenous
antioxidant defenses resulting in chronic inflammation and premature
aging. Botanical extracts such as Feverfew containing naturally
occurring antioxidants could replenish the depleted cutaneous stores
and perhaps forestall these degenerative changes. A
parthenolide-depleted extract of Feverfew (PD-Feverfew), which was free
of sensitization potential, was found to possess free radical
scavenging activity against a wide range of reactive oxygen species and
with greater activity than Vitamin C. In vitro, PD-Feverfew restored
cigarette smoke-mediated depletion of cellular thiols, attenuated the
formation of UV-induced hydrogen peroxide and reduced pro-inflammatory
cytokine release. In vivo, topical PD-Feverfew reduced UV-induced
epidermal hyperplasia, DNA damage and apoptosis. In a clinical study
PD-Feverfew treatment significantly reduced erythema versus placebo 24
h post-UV exposure. Through the ability to scavenge free radicals,
preserve endogenous antioxidant levels, reduce DNA damage and induce
DNA repair enzymes, which can help repair damaged DNA,
parthenolide-depleted extract of Feverfew may protect skin from the
numerous external aggressions encountered daily by the skin and reduce
the damage to oxidatively challenged skin. Gene response of human monocytic cells for the detection of antimigraine activity of feverfew extracts. Chen CF, Leung AY. Department of Genetics and Biochemistry, Jordan Hall 100, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634, USA. The herb feverfew is
a folk remedy for various conditions, including inflammation, fever,
psoriasis, rheumatism, and asthma. Like many herbal medicines,
feverfew's mechanisms of action in the human body are largely unknown
and its active ingredients remain elusive. Very often, different
extraction methods of herb material produce different physical and
biochemical properties and variation in clinical efficacy. We
identified 3 major methods of extraction for feverfew aerial parts and
used microarray technology to test the hypothesis that extracts
produced by different methods elicit different gene expression
profiles. We have identified approximately 200 genes that are
consistently regulated by the 2 presumptive active antimigraine
feverfew extracts but not associated with the inactive extract. Our
results suggest that the presumptive active feverfew extracts potently
stimulate more genes in human cells than the inactive extracts. We also
identified several genes as unique signatures for these active
extracts. All 3 feverfew extracts exhibited similar blockades on
lipopolysaccharide-mediated TNF-alpha (tumor necrosis factor alpha)
release, implicating that TNF-alpha is not responsible for the
differences in the effects of the 3 feverfew extracts in human cells.
In contrast, the active extracts more effectively suppressed CCL2 (also
known as monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, MCP-1) than the inactive
extracts, suggesting that CCL2 is a potential cellular target for
feverfew's antimigraine effects. Efficacy and
safety of 6.25 mg t.i.d. feverfew CO2-extract (MIG-99) in migraine
prevention--a randomized, double-blind, multicentre, placebo-controlled
study. Diener HC, Pfaffenrath V, Schnitker J, Friede M, Henneicke-von Zepelin HH. Neurologische UniversitÃ¤tsklinik, Essen, Germany. The efficacy and
tolerability of a CO(2)-extract of feverfew (MIG-99, 6.25 mg t.i.d.)
for migraine prevention were investigated in a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre, parallel-group study.
Patients (N = 170 intention-to-treat; MIG-99, N = 89; placebo, N = 81)
suffering from migraine according to International Headache Society
criteria were treated for 16 weeks after a 4-week baseline period. The
primary endpoint was the average number of migraine attacks per 28 days
during the treatment months 2 and 3 compared with baseline. Safety
parameters included adverse events, laboratory parameters, vital signs
and physical examination. The migraine frequency decreased from 4.76 by
1.9 attacks per month in the MIG-99 group and by 1.3 attacks in the
placebo group (P = 0.0456). Logistic regression of responder rates
showed an odds ratio of 3.4 in favour of MIG-99 (P = 0.0049). Adverse
events possibly related to study medication were 9/107 (8.4%) with
MIG-99 and 11/108 (10.2%) with placebo (P = 0.654). MIG